docs/en/user/basics/getting-started.md, before:

---
i18n:
  en: "Getting Started Guide"
  fr: "Guide de démarrage"
---

# Getting Started Guide

Welcome to **Galad Islands**! This guide will accompany you in your first steps in the archipelago.

!!! info "Before starting"
    **New player?** Make sure you have installed the game by following the [installation guide](installation.md).

## 🚀 First Connection

### Main Menu

When launching, you arrive at the main menu with the following options:

- **🎮 Play**: Start a new game
- **⚙️ Options**: Configure game settings
- **❓ Help**: Consult integrated help (F1)
- **👥 Credits**: Discover the development team
- **🚪 Quit**: Close the game

!!! tip "Recommended configuration"
    **Before your first game**, visit the **Options** menu to:
    - Adjust resolution to your screen
    - Configure volumes (music/effects)
    - Choose your language (French/English)
    - Test controls

## 🗺️ Discovering the Interface

### Overview

When you start a game, you find yourself in the **Galad Islands archipelago** with:

- **🌊 Oceanic map**: Overview of the archipelago
- **🚁 Free camera**: Navigate freely in the world
- **🔍 Zoom system**: Mouse wheel to zoom in/out
- **⚡ Action bar**: Interface at the bottom of the screen
- **📊 Debug information**: Press F3 to display them

### Essential Controls

| Key/Action | Function |
|------------|----------|
| **⬅️➡️⬆️⬇️** | Move camera |
| **Mouse wheel** | Zoom in/out |
| **Left click** | Select a unit |
| **F1** | Contextual help |
| **F3** | Debug information |
| **Escape** | Return to menu |

> 📖 **For more details**, consult the [controls guide](../gameplay/controls.md)

## ⚔️ Your First Steps in the Game

### Phase 1: Exploration (2-3 minutes)

!!! example "Exploration objectives"
    **🎯 What to do:**
    1. **Explore the map** with the arrow keys
    2. **Locate your units** (your scout next to your base)
    3. **Spot the islands** and points of interest
    4. **Identify enemies**
    5. **Find resources** (flying chests and gold on islands)

### Phase 2: First Combat (5 minutes)

!!! success "Basic strategy"
    **⚔️ How to engage in combat:**
    - **Select** your unit (left click)
    - **Approach** an isolated enemy
    - **Engage combat** by getting close enough and firing with the `A` key
    - **Monitor** the health bar (above units)
    - **Retreat** if necessary to avoid destruction

### Phase 3: Resource Management

!!! info "Gold sources"
    **💰 How to collect gold:**
    - **🎁 Chests**: Destroy chests scattered on the islands
    - **🏝️ Island resources**: Explore and harvest on different islands
    - **⚔️ Combat**: Eliminate enemy units to earn gold
    - **🚨 Warning**: Avoid explosive mines (dangerous objects)!

!!! tip "Smart economy"
    **🛒 Shopping tips:**
    - **Shop**: Accessible via the action bar at the bottom of the screen
    - **Variable prices**: Each unit type has a different cost
    - **Investment**: Start with versatile units
    - **Balance**: Alternate between attack and defense

## 🎯 Objectives for Your First Game

### Immediate Objectives (First 10 minutes)

- [ ] **Survive** the first confrontations
- [ ] **Collect** at least 100 gold coins
- [ ] **Buy** a new unit
- [ ] **Explore** 50% of the map
- [ ] **Eliminate** 3 enemy units

### Medium-term Objectives (20-30 minutes)

- [ ] **Control** several strategic islands
- [ ] **Build** a fleet of 5+ units
- [ ] **Master** the different unit types
- [ ] **Develop** a coherent strategy

## 🧠 Strategic Tips

### To Start Well

!!! success "Winning strategies"
    **🏆 Proven techniques:**
    - **Reconnaissance first**: Explore before attacking
    - **Progressive combat**: Eliminate isolated units
    - **Gold management**: Invest intelligently
    - **Positioning**: Use terrain to your advantage
    - **Diversification**: Vary unit types

### Beginner Mistakes to Avoid

!!! warning "Common pitfalls"
    **❌ Don't do:**
    - Attack without plan or reconnaissance
    - Spend all your gold at once
    - Neglect defense of your positions
    - Disperse forces without coordination
    - Ignore special unit abilities

## 🚀 Progression and Learning

### Improvement Steps

1. **🎮 Mastering the basics** (1-2 games)
   - Fluid controls
   - Interface understanding
   - Simple combat

2. **⚔️ Advanced tactics** (3-5 games)
   - Unit coordination
   - Resource management
   - Combat strategies

3. **🏆 Expertise** (10+ games)
   - Build optimization
   - Situation adaptation
   - Complete gameplay mastery

> 📚 **Learning resources:**
>
> - [Unit types and their roles](../units/units.md)
> - [Interface and action bar](../gameplay/action-bar.md)

## 🎯 Beginner Tips

!!! success "Beginner strategy"
    **Exploration phase (first 5 minutes)**
    1. Explore the entire map
    2. Locate gold sources
    3. Identify enemy positions
    4. Plan your strategy

!!! warning "Common mistakes"
    **To avoid:**
    - Attack without reconnaissance
    - Spend without thinking
    - Forget special abilities
    - Disperse forces

## ❓ Common Issues

### The game doesn't launch or stops immediately

!!! bug "Quick solutions"
    **🔧 Immediate actions:**
    1. **Restart** your computer
    2. **Check** that you downloaded the correct version (Windows/Linux/macOS)
    3. **Test** as administrator (Windows)
    4. **Consult** the [troubleshooting guide](installation.md#troubleshooting)

### Display or performance issues

!!! tip "Optimal configuration"
    **📺 Recommended settings:**

    - **Resolution**: Start with 1280x720 then enlarge the window
    - **Mode**: Windowed to start and read documentation at the same time

### Need additional help?

!!! info "Help resources"
    **📚 Where to find help:**
    - **[FAQ](../help/faq.md)**: Most common questions
    - **[GitHub Issues](https://github.com/Fydyr/Galad-Islands/issues)**: Report a bug
    - **Integrated help**: Press **F1** in the game

---

🎮 **Ready to play?** Discover the [gameplay guide](../gameplay/gameplay.md) now!

Commit message:

docs: ajout du système de tutoriels en jeu avec notifications contextuelles

docs/en/user/basics/getting-started.md, after:

---
i18n:
  en: "Getting Started Guide"
  fr: "Guide de démarrage"
---

# Getting Started Guide

Welcome to **Galad Islands**! This guide will accompany you in your first steps in the archipelago.

!!! info "Before starting"
    **New player?** Make sure you have installed the game by following the [installation guide](installation.md).

## 🚀 First Connection

### Main Menu

When launching, you arrive at the main menu with the following options:

- **🎮 Play**: Start a new game
- **⚙️ Options**: Configure game settings
- **❓ Help**: Consult integrated help (F1)
- **👥 Credits**: Discover the development team
- **🚪 Quit**: Close the game

!!! tip "Recommended configuration"
    **Before your first game**, visit the **Options** menu to:
    - Adjust resolution to your screen
    - Configure volumes (music/effects)
    - Choose your language (French/English)
    - Test controls

## 🗺️ Discovering the Interface

### Overview

When you start a game, you find yourself in the **Galad Islands archipelago** with:

- **🌊 Oceanic map**: Overview of the archipelago
- **🚁 Free camera**: Navigate freely in the world
- **🔍 Zoom system**: Mouse wheel to zoom in/out
- **⚡ Action bar**: Interface at the bottom of the screen
- **📊 Debug information**: Press F3 to display them

### Essential Controls

| Key/Action | Function |
|------------|----------|
| **⬅️➡️⬆️⬇️** | Move camera |
| **Mouse wheel** | Zoom in/out |
| **Left click** | Select a unit |
| **F1** | Contextual help |
| **F3** | Debug information |
| **Escape** | Return to menu |

> 📖 **For more details**, consult the [controls guide](../gameplay/controls.md)

## 🎓 In-game Tutorials

In-game tutorials help you learn the core mechanics and interface during your first session. They appear as small notifications in the top-right corner: a short title, a brief message, and two buttons — **Next** and **Skip**.

- Tutorials are contextual: they appear when important game events happen (game start, unit selection, opening the shop, spotting enemies, collecting a chest or island resource, etc.).
- By default, each tip shows only once.
- If several events happen at once, tips are queued; higher-priority tips (for example the welcome message or unit selection) are shown first.
- Tutorials do not appear in Spectator mode (AI vs AI).

How to manage tutorials:

- Open **Options** → **Gameplay**.
- Use **Show tutorials** to toggle all tutorials on or off.
- Use **Reset tutorials** to see the tips again (useful if you skipped them accidentally).

If a tutorial shows too early or too frequently, it might be linked to a game event — please report it and we'll adjust the trigger.

## ⚔️ Your First Steps in the Game

### Phase 1: Exploration (2-3 minutes)

!!! example "Exploration objectives"
    **🎯 What to do:**
    1. **Explore the map** with the arrow keys
    2. **Locate your units** (your scout next to your base)
    3. **Spot the islands** and points of interest
    4. **Identify enemies**
    5. **Find resources** (flying chests and gold on islands)

### Phase 2: First Combat (5 minutes)

!!! success "Basic strategy"
    **⚔️ How to engage in combat:**
    - **Select** your unit (left click)
    - **Approach** an isolated enemy
    - **Engage combat** by getting close enough and firing with the `A` key
    - **Monitor** the health bar (above units)
    - **Retreat** if necessary to avoid destruction

### Phase 3: Resource Management

!!! info "Gold sources"
    **💰 How to collect gold:**
    - **🎁 Chests**: Destroy chests scattered on the islands
    - **🏝️ Island resources**: Explore and harvest on different islands
    - **⚔️ Combat**: Eliminate enemy units to earn gold
    - **🚨 Warning**: Avoid explosive mines (dangerous objects)!

!!! tip "Smart economy"
    **🛒 Shopping tips:**
    - **Shop**: Accessible via the action bar at the bottom of the screen
    - **Variable prices**: Each unit type has a different cost
    - **Investment**: Start with versatile units
    - **Balance**: Alternate between attack and defense

## 🎯 Objectives for Your First Game

### Immediate Objectives (First 10 minutes)

- [ ] **Survive** the first confrontations
- [ ] **Collect** at least 100 gold coins
- [ ] **Buy** a new unit
- [ ] **Explore** 50% of the map
- [ ] **Eliminate** 3 enemy units

### Medium-term Objectives (20-30 minutes)

- [ ] **Control** several strategic islands
- [ ] **Build** a fleet of 5+ units
- [ ] **Master** the different unit types
- [ ] **Develop** a coherent strategy

## 🧠 Strategic Tips

### To Start Well

!!! success "Winning strategies"
    **🏆 Proven techniques:**
    - **Reconnaissance first**: Explore before attacking
    - **Progressive combat**: Eliminate isolated units
    - **Gold management**: Invest intelligently
    - **Positioning**: Use terrain to your advantage
    - **Diversification**: Vary unit types

### Beginner Mistakes to Avoid

!!! warning "Common pitfalls"
    **❌ Don't do:**
    - Attack without plan or reconnaissance
    - Spend all your gold at once
    - Neglect defense of your positions
    - Disperse forces without coordination
    - Ignore special unit abilities

## 🚀 Progression and Learning

### Improvement Steps

1. **🎮 Mastering the basics** (1-2 games)
   - Fluid controls
   - Interface understanding
   - Simple combat

2. **⚔️ Advanced tactics** (3-5 games)
   - Unit coordination
   - Resource management
   - Combat strategies

3. **🏆 Expertise** (10+ games)
   - Build optimization
   - Situation adaptation
   - Complete gameplay mastery

> 📚 **Learning resources:**
>
> - [Unit types and their roles](../units/units.md)
> - [Interface and action bar](../gameplay/action-bar.md)

## 🎯 Beginner Tips

!!! success "Beginner strategy"
    **Exploration phase (first 5 minutes)**
    1. Explore the entire map
    2. Locate gold sources
    3. Identify enemy positions
    4. Plan your strategy

!!! warning "Common mistakes"
    **To avoid:**
    - Attack without reconnaissance
    - Spend without thinking
    - Forget special abilities
    - Disperse forces

## ❓ Common Issues

### The game doesn't launch or stops immediately

!!! bug "Quick solutions"
    **🔧 Immediate actions:**
    1. **Restart** your computer
    2. **Check** that you downloaded the correct version (Windows/Linux/macOS)
    3. **Test** as administrator (Windows)
    4. **Consult** the [troubleshooting guide](installation.md#troubleshooting)

### Display or performance issues

!!! tip "Optimal configuration"
    **📺 Recommended settings:**

    - **Resolution**: Start with 1280x720 then enlarge the window
    - **Mode**: Windowed to start and read documentation at the same time

### Need additional help?

!!! info "Help resources"
    **📚 Where to find help:**
    - **[FAQ](../help/faq.md)**: Most common questions
    - **[GitHub Issues](https://github.com/Fydyr/Galad-Islands/issues)**: Report a bug
    - **Integrated help**: Press **F1** in the game

---

🎮 **Ready to play?** Discover the [gameplay guide](../gameplay/gameplay.md) now!
