docs/en/user/basics/settings.md, before:

---
i18n:
  en: "Game Settings"
  fr: "Paramètres du jeu"
---

# ⚙️ Game Settings

This page explains all the settings available in Galad Islands to customize your gaming experience.

## Accessing Settings

Settings can be accessed in two ways:

1. **In-game**: Press `Escape` to open the pause menu, then select "Options"
2. **Configuration Tool**: Use the external tool `python tools/galad_config.py`

!!! tip "Settings are automatically saved"
    All changes are saved immediately and will be applied the next time you start the game.

## Audio Settings

### Master Volume

- **Range**: 0% to 100%
- **Default**: 50%
- **Description**: Controls the overall game volume

### Music Volume

- **Range**: 0% to 100%
- **Default**: 70%
- **Description**: Controls background music volume

### Sound Effects Volume

- **Range**: 0% to 100%
- **Default**: 80%
- **Description**: Controls sound effects and UI sounds volume

## Graphics Settings

### Resolution

- **Options**: Various resolutions (800x600, 1024x768, 1280x720, etc.)
- **Default**: System resolution
- **Description**: Changes the game window size

### Fullscreen Mode

- **Options**: Windowed / Fullscreen
- **Default**: Windowed
- **Description**: Toggles between windowed and fullscreen display

### VSync (Vertical Synchronization)

- **Options**: Enabled / Disabled
- **Default**: Enabled
- **Description**: Synchronizes frame rate with monitor refresh rate to prevent screen tearing

### Frame Rate (Max FPS)

- **Options**: 30 / 60 / 90 / 120 / 144 / 240 (or any integer)
- **Default**: 60
- **Description**: Caps the CPU-side game loop to the specified maximum frames per second. When VSync is enabled and supported by your system, the effective FPS will also be limited by your monitor refresh rate.

!!! tip
  For smooth gameplay on most systems: keep VSync Enabled and Max FPS set to 60 or your monitor's refresh (e.g., 120/144). On laptops, lowering Max FPS (e.g., 45–60) can reduce power consumption.

## Performance Settings

### Performance Mode

- **Options**: Auto / High / Medium / Low
- **Default**: Auto
- **Description**: Adjusts various performance settings automatically

| Mode | Description |
|------|-------------|
| **Auto** | Automatically adjusts based on your system |
| **High** | Maximum quality, best visuals |
| **Medium** | Balanced quality and performance |
| **Low** | Maximum performance, reduced visuals |

### Particles

- **Options**: Enabled / Disabled
- **Default**: Enabled
- **Description**: Toggles visual particle effects (explosions, trails, etc.)

### Shadows

- **Options**: Enabled / Disabled
- **Default**: Enabled
- **Description**: Toggles shadow effects on units and terrain

### Marauder AI Learning

- **Options**: Enabled / Disabled
- **Default**: Enabled
- **Description**: When enabled, Marauder (Barhamus) units continuously learn during gameplay and save models to the `models/` folder. This can increase CPU usage and disk writes over long sessions.

!!! info "Managing Marauder models"
  You can clean up or reset learning models with the provided GUI tool:
    
  ```bash
  # Launch the GUI tool (provided in releases)
  ./MaraudeurAiCleaner          # Linux/macOS
  MaraudeurAiCleaner.exe        # Windows
  ```
    
  Deleting models is safe; the AI will recreate them automatically.

  Tip: the MaraudeurAiCleaner tool automatically follows the language configured in the game (`galad_config.json`).

## Controls Settings

### Mouse Sensitivity

- **Range**: 50% to 200%
- **Default**: 100%
- **Description**: Adjusts mouse responsiveness for camera movement

### Keyboard Layout

- **Options**: QWERTY / AZERTY
- **Default**: QWERTY
- **Description**: Adapts keyboard shortcuts for different layouts

## Language Settings

### Interface Language

- **Options**: English / French
- **Default**: System language (or English)
- **Description**: Changes the language of menus and interface

!!! info "Language changes require restart"
    Language changes will be applied the next time you start the game.

## Advanced Settings

### Debug Mode

- **Access**: Press `F3` in-game
- **Description**: Shows debug information (FPS, coordinates, etc.)
- **Note**: Intended for developers and troubleshooting

### Configuration File

- **Location**: `galad_config.json`
- **Description**: All settings are stored in this file
- **Tip**: Back up this file before major changes

## Troubleshooting

### Settings Not Saving

- Check that the `galad_config.json` file is not read-only
- Ensure you have write permissions in the game directory

### Performance Issues

- Try setting Performance Mode to "Low"
- Disable VSync if you experience stuttering
- Lower the resolution if FPS is too low

### Audio Issues

- Check system audio settings
- Try different volume levels
- Restart the game if audio doesn't work

## Recommended Settings

### For Maximum Performance

- Performance Mode: Low
- VSync: Disabled
- Particles: Disabled
- Shadows: Disabled
- Resolution: 800x600

### For Best Visual Quality

- Performance Mode: High
- VSync: Enabled
- Particles: Enabled
- Shadows: Enabled
- Resolution: Highest available

### For Balanced Experience

- Performance Mode: Auto (or Medium)
- VSync: Enabled
- Particles: Enabled
- Shadows: Enabled
- Resolution: 1280x720 or higher

Commit message:

refactor: Transfer Maraudeur Ai Cleaner functions into Galad Config Tool
- Updated localization files to reflect the integration of Marauder models management into the galad-config-tool.
- Removed the MaraudeurAiCleaner tool and its associated files, merging its functionality into the galad-config-tool.
- Enhanced the galad-config-tool GUI with a new tab for managing Marauder models, including options to list, delete, and filter models.
- Updated deployment scripts to remove references to the MaraudeurAiCleaner.
- Adjusted packaging scripts to exclude the MaraudeurAiCleaner from the release package.
- Updated documentation to reflect changes in the tools and their functionalities.

docs/en/user/basics/settings.md, after:

---
i18n:
  en: "Game Settings"
  fr: "Paramètres du jeu"
---

# ⚙️ Game Settings

This page explains all the settings available in Galad Islands to customize your gaming experience.

## Accessing Settings

Settings can be accessed in two ways:

1. **In-game**: Press `Escape` to open the pause menu, then select "Options"
2. **Configuration Tool**: Use the external tool `python tools/galad_config.py`

!!! tip "Settings are automatically saved"
    All changes are saved immediately and will be applied the next time you start the game.

## Audio Settings

### Master Volume

- **Range**: 0% to 100%
- **Default**: 50%
- **Description**: Controls the overall game volume

### Music Volume

- **Range**: 0% to 100%
- **Default**: 70%
- **Description**: Controls background music volume

### Sound Effects Volume

- **Range**: 0% to 100%
- **Default**: 80%
- **Description**: Controls sound effects and UI sounds volume

## Graphics Settings

### Resolution

- **Options**: Various resolutions (800x600, 1024x768, 1280x720, etc.)
- **Default**: System resolution
- **Description**: Changes the game window size

### Fullscreen Mode

- **Options**: Windowed / Fullscreen
- **Default**: Windowed
- **Description**: Toggles between windowed and fullscreen display

### VSync (Vertical Synchronization)

- **Options**: Enabled / Disabled
- **Default**: Enabled
- **Description**: Synchronizes frame rate with monitor refresh rate to prevent screen tearing

### Frame Rate (Max FPS)

- **Options**: 30 / 60 / 90 / 120 / 144 / 240 (or any integer)
- **Default**: 60
- **Description**: Caps the CPU-side game loop to the specified maximum frames per second. When VSync is enabled and supported by your system, the effective FPS will also be limited by your monitor refresh rate.

!!! tip
  For smooth gameplay on most systems: keep VSync Enabled and Max FPS set to 60 or your monitor's refresh (e.g., 120/144). On laptops, lowering Max FPS (e.g., 45–60) can reduce power consumption.

## Performance Settings

### Performance Mode

- **Options**: Auto / High / Medium / Low
- **Default**: Auto
- **Description**: Adjusts various performance settings automatically

| Mode | Description |
|------|-------------|
| **Auto** | Automatically adjusts based on your system |
| **High** | Maximum quality, best visuals |
| **Medium** | Balanced quality and performance |
| **Low** | Maximum performance, reduced visuals |

### Particles

- **Options**: Enabled / Disabled
- **Default**: Enabled
- **Description**: Toggles visual particle effects (explosions, trails, etc.)

### Shadows

- **Options**: Enabled / Disabled
- **Default**: Enabled
- **Description**: Toggles shadow effects on units and terrain

### Marauder AI Learning

- **Options**: Enabled / Disabled
- **Default**: Enabled
- **Description**: When enabled, Marauder (Barhamus) units continuously learn during gameplay and save models to the `models/` folder. This can increase CPU usage and disk writes over long sessions.

!!! info "Managing Marauder models"
  You can clean up or reset learning models either via the command-line utility or the integrated GUI inside the `galad-config-tool`.

  GUI — open `galad-config-tool` and select the "Marauder models" tab to list, delete, keep N most recent, or remove older models.

  CLI — the scripts in `scripts/` still provide commands for automated or remote cleaning:

  ```bash
  # Examples (script-based)
  python scripts/clean_models.py --marauder --list
  python scripts/clean_models.py --marauder --keep 5
  python scripts/clean_models.py --marauder --older-than 7
  ```

  Deleting models is safe; the AI will recreate them automatically.

## Controls Settings

### Mouse Sensitivity

- **Range**: 50% to 200%
- **Default**: 100%
- **Description**: Adjusts mouse responsiveness for camera movement

### Keyboard Layout

- **Options**: QWERTY / AZERTY
- **Default**: QWERTY
- **Description**: Adapts keyboard shortcuts for different layouts

## Language Settings

### Interface Language

- **Options**: English / French
- **Default**: System language (or English)
- **Description**: Changes the language of menus and interface

!!! info "Language changes require restart"
    Language changes will be applied the next time you start the game.

## Advanced Settings

### Debug Mode

- **Access**: Press `F3` in-game
- **Description**: Shows debug information (FPS, coordinates, etc.)
- **Note**: Intended for developers and troubleshooting

### Configuration File

- **Location**: `galad_config.json`
- **Description**: All settings are stored in this file
- **Tip**: Back up this file before major changes

## Troubleshooting

### Settings Not Saving

- Check that the `galad_config.json` file is not read-only
- Ensure you have write permissions in the game directory

### Performance Issues

- Try setting Performance Mode to "Low"
- Disable VSync if you experience stuttering
- Lower the resolution if FPS is too low

### Audio Issues

- Check system audio settings
- Try different volume levels
- Restart the game if audio doesn't work

## Recommended Settings

### For Maximum Performance

- Performance Mode: Low
- VSync: Disabled
- Particles: Disabled
- Shadows: Disabled
- Resolution: 800x600

### For Best Visual Quality

- Performance Mode: High
- VSync: Enabled
- Particles: Enabled
- Shadows: Enabled
- Resolution: Highest available

### For Balanced Experience

- Performance Mode: Auto (or Medium)
- VSync: Enabled
- Particles: Enabled
- Shadows: Enabled
- Resolution: 1280x720 or higher
