docs/en/user/gameplay/controls.md, before:

---
i18n:
  en: "Controls & Interfaces"
  fr: "Contrôles et interfaces"
---

# 🕹️ Controls & Interfaces

## Main Interface

### Pause Menu

- **Resume**: Resume the game
- **Options**: Audio, graphics, controls settings
- **Help**: Tutorials, keyboard shortcuts, about
- **Quit**: End the game

### Bottom Toolbar

- **Shop**: Buttons to buy each available unit type
- **Special Actions**: Attack, Special Abilities
- **Information**: Current gold, Selected unit health

### Game Area

- **Map**: Overview of islands and units
- **Detailed Information**: Stats of selected units

## Basic Controls

### Navigation

- **Left Click**: Select a unit
- **Right Click**: Give movement order

### Special Actions

- **A**: Attack / Fire cannonball
- **Ctrl**: Slow down selected unit
- **Tab**: Toggle frontal or lateral attack mode
- **E**: Special ability of selected unit

## Advanced Keyboard Shortcuts

### Unit Group Management

- **1-2**: Change selected unit
- **T**: Change team

### Camera Control

- **Arrow Keys**: Move camera
- **C**: Toggle automatic unit following
- **Mouse Wheel**: Zoom in/out
- **Ctrl + Mouse Wheel**: Fast zoom (sensitivity ×2)
- **Ctrl + Arrow Keys**: Fast camera movement (sensitivity ×2)

### User Interface

- **Escape**: Pause/options menu
- **F1**: Display help
- **F3**: Debug mode (developer)

## Special Commands

### Special Abilities by Unit

- **Scout**: Evasion maneuver (temporary invincibility)
- **Marauder**: Enemy shield reduction
- **Leviathan**: Double shot (second projectile free)
- **Druid**: Immobilizing vine projectile
- **Architect**: Acceleration of allied Zeppelin reloading

!!! info "Ability Activation"
    All special abilities are activated with the **E** key when the corresponding unit is selected. Each ability has its own cooldown time.

---

*Master these controls and the interface will become a natural extension of your strategy!*

Commit message:

docs: ajouter le système de contrôle de l'IA en mode Auto avec options d'activation/désactivation pour les unités et les bases

docs/en/user/gameplay/controls.md, after:

---
i18n:
  en: "Controls & Interfaces"
  fr: "Contrôles et interfaces"
---

# 🕹️ Controls & Interfaces

## Main Interface

### Pause Menu

- **Resume**: Resume the game
- **Options**: Audio, graphics, controls settings
- **Help**: Tutorials, keyboard shortcuts, about
- **Quit**: End the game

### Bottom Toolbar

- **Shop**: Buttons to buy each available unit type
- **Special Actions**: Attack, Special Abilities
- **Information**: Current gold, Selected unit health

### Game Area

- **Map**: Overview of islands and units
- **Detailed Information**: Stats of selected units

## Basic Controls

### Navigation

- **Left Click**: Select a unit
- **Right Click**: Give movement order

### Special Actions

- **A**: Attack / Fire cannonball
- **Ctrl**: Slow down selected unit
- **Tab**: Toggle frontal or lateral attack mode
- **E**: Special ability of selected unit
- **T**: Enable/Disable AI for selected unit (Auto mode)
- **Ctrl + T**: Enable/Disable AI for all units

### AI Control (Auto Mode)

Auto mode allows you to delegate control of your units and base to the AI:

- **Auto Button**: Click the "Auto" button in the action bar to enable/disable AI for the selected unit
- **T Key**: Keyboard shortcut to toggle AI for the selected unit
- **Ctrl + Click on Auto**: Enable/Disable AI for all your units at once
- **Ctrl + T**: Same effect as Ctrl + Click on Auto

!!! tip "Auto Mode"
    - In Player vs AI mode, all units start with AI disabled for the active team
    - You can enable AI for some units while manually controlling others
    - AI also works for your base (automatic unit purchasing)
    - Ideal for managing multiple fronts simultaneously or testing your strategies

## Advanced Keyboard Shortcuts

### Unit Group Management

- **1-2**: Change selected unit
- **T**: Enable/Disable AI for selected unit (Auto mode)
- **Ctrl + T**: Enable/Disable AI for all units

### Team Switching

- **F**: Change team (switch between Team 1 and Team 2)

### Camera Control

- **Arrow Keys**: Move camera
- **C**: Toggle automatic unit following
- **Mouse Wheel**: Zoom in/out
- **Ctrl + Mouse Wheel**: Fast zoom (sensitivity ×2)
- **Ctrl + Arrow Keys**: Fast camera movement (sensitivity ×2)

### User Interface

- **Escape**: Pause/options menu
- **F1**: Display help
- **F3**: Debug mode (developer)

## Special Commands

### Special Abilities by Unit

- **Scout**: Evasion maneuver (temporary invincibility)
- **Marauder**: Enemy shield reduction
- **Leviathan**: Double shot (second projectile free)
- **Druid**: Immobilizing vine projectile
- **Architect**: Acceleration of allied Zeppelin reloading

!!! info "Ability Activation"
    All special abilities are activated with the **E** key when the corresponding unit is selected. Each ability has its own cooldown time.

---

*Master these controls and the interface will become a natural extension of your strategy!*
